KD Reformat outbreak templates (#172)
R4EPI/sitrep: inst/rmarkdown/templates/ajs_outbreak/skeleton/skeleton.Rmd

- It is organised by time, place and person. 
- For a more detailed exaplanation of this template, see [Wiki](https://github.com/R4EPI/sitrep/wiki)
- Feedback and suggestions are welcome at the [GitHub issues page](https://github.com/R4EPI/sitrep/issues)

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
All text within <! > will not show in your final document. These comments are
used to explain the template. You can delete them if you want.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->

## Installing and loading required packages 
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Several packages are required for different aspects of  analysis with *R*. 
You will need to install these before starting. 

These packages can be quite large and may take a while to download in the
field. If you have access to a USB key with these packages, it makes sense to
copy and paste the packages into your computer's R package library 
(run the command .libPaths() to see the folder path). 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->

> For help installing packages, see the [Wiki](https://github.com/R4EPI/sitrep/wiki/1)-Getting-started)

Reviewer: The link to the github wiki never worked because of the parens. Here's the link to the equivalent training page:

```suggestion
For help installing packages, see the [Wiki](https://r4epis.netlify.com/welcome/001-getting-started/)
```

Reviewer 2: fixed, but removed hyperlink markdown as markdown not rendered for this comment. displays as clickable link for me in rstudio.

}

## Set default options for plots and charts

# set default text size to 16 for plots
# give classic black/white axes for plots
ggplot2::theme_set(theme_classic(base_size = 18))

# sets the theme in ggplot for epicurves
epicurve_theme <- theme(
  axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 45, hjust = 1, vjust = 1), 
  legend.title = element_blank(),
  panel.grid.major.x = element_line(color = "grey60", linetype = 3),
  panel.grid.major.y = element_line(color = "grey60", linetype = 3))

# sets the labels in ggplot for the epicurves

> epicurve_labels <- labs(x = "Calendar week", 

Author: get an error because reporting week is defined lower down 
```
> # sets the labels in ggplot for the epicurves
> epicurve_labels <- labs(x = "Calendar week", 
+                         y = "Cases (n)", 
+                         title = "Cases by week of onset",
+                         subtitle = sprintf("Source: MSF data from %s", reporting_week)
+                        ) 
Error in sprintf("Source: MSF data from %s", reporting_week) : 
  object 'reporting_week' not found
```

Reviewer: Same.

                        y = "Cases (n)", 
                        title = "Cases by week of onset",
                        subtitle = sprintf("Source: MSF data from %s", reporting_week)
                       ) 

```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
You need to set the week you want to report on. Generally, this is the previous
week. Put it below.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->

> ```{r define_current_week}

Reviewer: My suggestion would be to simply merge this chunk with the one above it so that it's more clear that the above chunk is for setting up variables.

Reviewer 2: I think it gets lost if you throw it in the setup chunk -- hard to find and realize you need to do something.

# Set the day that defines the beginning of your epiweek.
# (the standard is to start on Monday)
aweek::set_week_start("Monday")

# set current week 

> reporting_week <- "2019-W25"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reporting_week <- as.aweek("2019-W25")
```

Reviewer: We could also use the construct:

```r
# define the end of the observation period as the last day of the week, which will appear as YYYY-Www-7
obs_end <- get_aweek(week = 25, year = 2019, day = 7)
# truncate to define the general week (YYYY-Www)
reporting_week <- trunc(obs_end)
```

Reviewer 2: did the first.

```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> To play with this template, you can create fake data. Comment out this chunk

Reviewer: We discussed this during our call and came to the conclusion that it's better to comment out code because it's easier for the user to spot and correct.

when you are using real data.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
```{r read_fake_data, warning = FALSE, message = FALSE}

linelist_raw <- gen_data("AJS")

# fake lab data

> # lab_results <- linelist_cleaned %>% 

Reviewer 2: as above w Zhian

#                 select(case_number) %>% 
#                 mutate(test_result = sample(c("Positive", "Negative"),
#                                             nrow(linelist_cleaned), 
#                                             replace = TRUE)
#                        )

# fake map data
# map <- gen_polygon(regions = unique(linelist_cleaned$patient_origin))
```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
You should load your data as a linelist, where each row is one case.

There are three options:
- Your data is from DHIS2: use read_DHIS_excel_data
- Your data is NOT FROM DHIS2 and in Excel, CSV, or Stata format: 
use read_nonDHIS_data

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
read_DHIS_data

This section is for data from DHIS2.
It uses the standardized MSF data dictionary.

> If you didn't use the standardized data dictionary, go to read_nonDHIS_data.

Reviewer 2: as above with Zhian

## For a specific sheet, use "which"
# linelist_raw <- rio::import(here("linelist.xlsx"), which = "Sheet1")

## Excel file with password ----------------------------------------------------
# Use this section if your Excel has a password.

# install.packages(c("excel.link", "askpass"))
# library(excel.link)

# linelist_raw <- xl.read.file(here("linelist.xlsx"),
#                              xl.sheet = "Sheet1",
#                              password = askpass::askpass(prompt = "please enter file password"))

## CSV file --------------------------------------------------------------------
# linelist_raw <- rio::import(here("linelist.csv"))

``` 

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
prep_DHIS_data

This section is for data from DHIS2 that you loaded in read_DHIS_data.

If you didn't use DHIS2 data, go to read_nonDHIS_data.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->

```{r prep_DHIS_data, warning = FALSE, message = FALSE}

## MSF AJS Dictionary ----------------------------------------------------------
## This step shows you the data dictionary.

> ## The data dictionary has variable names in the data_element_shortname column. 

Reviewer 2: I think if we do each section in the html comment, it gets too lengthy (wall of text!), and you lose some of the explanatory nature of the comments. So agreed on dictionary but not on things like "clean col names".

# make a copy of your orginal dataset and name it linelist_cleaned
linelist_cleaned <- linelist_raw

# define clean variable names using clean_labels from the epitrix package
cleaned_colnames <- epitrix::clean_labels(colnames(linelist_raw))

# overwrite variable names with defined clean names
colnames(linelist_cleaned) <- cleaned_colnames

## Standardising values --------------------------------------------------------
## This step fixes the values so that you can read them.
## values like 1/0 will be recoded as "Yes" / "No" based on the dictionary

linelist_cleaned <- clean_variable_spelling(linelist_cleaned,
                                            wordlists = filter(linelist_dict,
                                                               !is.na(option_code)),
                                            spelling_vars = "data_element_shortname",
                                            sort_by = "option_order_in_set"
                                           )

```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
read_nonDHIS_data

This section is for data not from DHIS2.

> If you have already loaded data from DHIS2, go to read_population_data.

Author: and leave this chunk as eval = FALSE

Reviewer 2: as above

# You can specify a range in an excel sheet.
# linelist_raw <- rio::import(here("linelist.xlsx"), range = "B2:J102")

## Excel file with password ----------------------------------------------------
# Use this section if your Excel has a password.

# install.packages(c("excel.link", "askpass"))
# library(excel.link)

# linelist_raw <- xl.read.file(here("linelist.xlsx"),
#                              xl.sheet = "Sheet1",
#                              password = askpass::askpass(prompt = "please enter file password"))

## CSV file --------------------------------------------------------------------
# linelist_raw <- rio::import(here("linelist.csv"))

## Stata data file -------------------------------------------------------------
# linelist_raw <- rio::import(here("linelist.dat"))
```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
prep_nonDHIS_data

This section is for data not from DHIS2. 
If you have already loaded data from DHIS2, go to read_population_data.

It is more difficult to prepare the nonDHIS data. You can do it! It will just
take a little more work.

Checklist to update this script to match your data:

> [ ] Comment out all lines in read_DHIS_data and prep_DHIS_data

Author: set eval = FALSE

Reviewer 2: as above

[ ] Recode your variable names to match the dictionary
[ ] Recode variable contents to match the dictionary
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->

```{r prep_nonDHIS_data, warning = FALSE, message = FALSE}
## MSF AJS Dictionary ----------------------------------------------------------
## This step shows you the data dictionary.

## The data dictionary has variable names in the data_element_shortname column. 
## Possible values for each variable are specified in code and name columns.
## Code has the shortened value and Name has the full-text value.

# get MSF standard dictionary for AJS 
linelist_dict <- msf_dict("AJS", compact = FALSE) %>%
  select(option_code, option_name, everything())

## look at the standard dictionary by uncommenting the line below
# View(linelist_dict) 

## You will need to recode your variables to match the data dictionary.

## Clean column names ----------------------------------------------------------
## This step fixes the column names so they are easy to use in R.

# make a copy of your orginal dataset and name it linelist_cleaned

> linelist_cleaned <- linelist_raw

Author: This is why the age pyramid is not working - because you are overwriting linelist_cleaned! 
I have set this chunk to eval = FALSE in latest commit

## Use the function msf_dict_rename_helper() to create a template based on the
## AJS dictionary. This will copy a rename command like the one above to your
## clipboard.

# msf_dict_rename_helper("AJS")

## Paste the result below and your column names to the matching variable.
## Be careful! You still need to be aware of what each variable means and what
## values it takes.
## If there are any variables that are in the MSF dictionary that are not in
## your data set, then you should comment them out, but be aware that some
## analyses may not run because of this. 

## Here is an EXAMPLE for changing a few specific names. function. In this
## example, we have the columns "gender" and "age" that we want to rename as
## "sex" and "age_years". 
## The formula for this is rename(data, NEW_NAME = OLD_NAME).

# linelist_cleaned <- rename(linelist_cleaned, 
#                            sex       = gender, # TEXT
#                            age_years = age     # INTEGER_POSITIVE
# )

```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
read_population_data

This template uses population data to calculate things like incidence.

> There are two options:

Author: need to comment out or delete section you are not using...

- You can read in a spreadsheet with age group and region data. (You can see an
example spreadsheet TODO.)

> - If you have the total or regional populations, you can estimate the age group

Author: can also type in counts now...

Reviewer 2: can you give an example? or do i just need to rebuild pkg to get the correct help file?

Author: think merge master and then build for correct help file

  strata = NULL) %>%               # do not stratify by gender
  rename(patient_origin = groups,  # rename columns (syntax is NEW NAME = OLD NAME)
         population = n)

```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
lab_data

If you have lab data, you can read it in here.
You will need to make sure that your identifier (e.g. case_number) matches the
linelist.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
```{r lab_data}
## Read data -------------------------------------------------------------------
## This step reads in your lab data from Excel.
## You may need to rename your columns.

## to read in a specific sheet use "which"
# lab_data <- rio::import(here("labresults.xlsx"), which = "Sheet1")

## repeat preparation steps as appropriate
## make sure your unique ID variable name matches!

## Merge lab to linelist -------------------------------------------------------
# linelist_cleaned <- left_join(linelist_cleaned, lab_results, 
#                               by = "case_number")
```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> browse_data

Author: ùncomment all the code and set to eval = FALSE - then give explanation here that you dont want this section running in your markdown - but is just to have code for browsing.

Reviewer 2: as above re: eval = FALSE

You'll want to look at your data. Here are a few ways you can explore.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
```{r browse_data, eval = FALSE}
## view the first ten rows of data
head(linelist_cleaned, n = 10)

## view your whole dataset interactively (in an excel style format)
View(linelist_cleaned)

## overview of variable types and contents
str(linelist_cleaned)

## get summary: 
## mean, median and max values of numeric variables
## counts for categorical variables
## also gives number of NAs
summary(linelist_cleaned)

## view unique values contained in variables 
## you can run this for any column -- just replace the column name
unique(linelist_cleaned$patient_origin) 

> 

Author: whats reasoning for deleting this?

Author: I dont see the issue in having it here if the chunk is eval = FALSE anyway

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why we want to drop in summarytools without explanation -- there are many alternatives for viewing your data. It's not clear why we want to throw summarytools at people here without any idea of why it's helpful or what it would do differently. At best, this line will be ignored. At worst, people waste a ton of time trying to figure out a new package that we don't explain or otherwise use.

Author: its a one liner that gives you an easy overview, dont think there is that much room for confusion.... but fine to delete.

```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> remove_unused

Author: maybe remove_unused_data - thought at first this was a tag to delete the section.

## Drop unused rows  -----------------------------------------------------------
# This step removes blank rows that don't have both a date of admission and ID
# number.
linelist_cleaned <- linelist_cleaned %>% 
  filter(!is.na(case_number) & !is.na(date_of_consultation_admission)) 

## Drop columns ----------------------------------------------------------------
## OPTIONAL: This step shows you how you can remove certain variables.

# linelist_cleaned <- linelist_cleaned %>%
#   select(-c(msf_involvement, treatment_facility_site))

## OPTIONAL: if you want to inspect certain variables, you can select these by
## name or column number. This example creates a reduced dataset for the first
## three columns, age_years, and sex.

# linelist_reduced <- select(linelist_cleaned, c(1:3, "age_years", "sex"))

```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
This part of the script will create and clean variables in your data.

All your cleaning and variable creation should happen in these chunks.
That way, in case something goes wrong, you can push the small arrow at the top
of the chunk to re-run all the code chunks up to the current one.

> You must adapt this section according to your data!

Author: maybe give an overview of the chunks available here?

  mutate_at(DATEVARS, linelist::guess_dates,
            error_tolerance = 0.5)

## Non-DHIS2 data --------------------------------------------------------------
## Use this section if you did not have DHIS2 data. 

> # use the guess_dates() function to make a first pass at date variables.

Author: if we are going to have commented out code - then commented text should have two ## to be easier to differentiate from code

Author: also this way if you just highlight the whole section and ctrl+shift+c then the comments stay comments and code becomes available

#                                            "15-29 years",
#                                            "30-44 years", 
#                                            "45+ years")))
```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
create_vars

> This chunk will help you construct new variables from other variables.

Author: maybe chuck in an overview of different types of vars in this seciton?

Reviewer 2: Do you mean like describing each type?
I think you need to have that information before the template. But open to adding.

Author: just a short bullet list, date vars, numeric vars, factors,... wahtever else...

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
```{r create_vars}

## Numeric variables -----------------------------------------------------------
# This step creates a variable for number of days under observation.
# You can adapt this step to create other calculated variables

# create number of days under observation
linelist_cleaned <- mutate(linelist_cleaned, 
                           obs_days = as.numeric(date_of_exit - 
                                                   date_of_consultation_admission))

# Factor (categorical) variables -----------------------------------------------

# This step creates a variable from another character/factor variable
# You can adapt this step to create other calculated variables

> # The variable DIED will be binary -- if patient died or not

Author: maybe specify it will be TRUE/FALSE

# if your variable is named ("Dead on arrival", "Dead in facility"), use this

> linelist_cleaned$DIED <- grepl("Dead", linelist_cleaned$exit_status)

Reviewer: I'm thinking if it would be better to change `grepl("thing", data$variable)` to `str_detect(data$variable, "thing")` to better align with the whole `data$variable %in% c("thing", "thang")` vibe.

    exit_status == "Left against medical advice"              ~ "Left"
  ))

## Recode character variables -------------------------------------------------
## This step shows how to fix misspellings in the geographic region variable.
## Ideally, you want these values to match your shapefile and population data!

# linelist_cleaned <- linelist_cleaned %>%
#   mutate(patient_origin_free_text = fct_recode(patient_origin_free_text,
#     # List all incorrect mis-spellings here ("new" = "old")
#     "Village D" = "Valliages DD",
#     "Village D" = "Villiage D"
#   ))

> ## sometimes, coding is inconsistent across variables -- for example, "Yes" / "No"

Author: go in factor section? forcats::fct_recode...

Reviewer 2: actually, patient_origin_free_text is not a factor -- should be a case_when, no?

Reviewer: Good point... this forcats::fct_recode will generate a factor, which doesn't particularly make sense for a free text field

Author: actually this shouldnt even be using the free_text option, theres a variable i think just called patient_origin that isnt free text, use everywhere else

Reviewer 2: still not a factor though -- will update varname

 #      No  = "no",  
 #      No  = "0",  
 #    )     

# Create a variable based on rules from other simple character variables
# If you have access to lab results, you can create a case definition variable 
# the tilda (~) is used to assign the new values (Conf, prob, susp, unknown)
# starting from the specific to the general
# TRUE assigns all remaining rows 
# You MUST modify this section to match your case definition. The below
# uses positive RDT for Confirmed and epi link only for Probable.
#
linelist_cleaned <- linelist_cleaned %>%
  mutate(case_def = case_when(
    is.na(hep_e_rdt) & is.na(other_cases_in_hh)           ~ NA_character_,
    hep_e_rdt == "Positive"                               ~ "Confirmed",
    hep_e_rdt != "Positive" & other_cases_in_hh == "Yes"  ~ "Probable",
    TRUE                                                  ~ "Suspected"
  ))
```
  

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
factor_vars

> This chunk will help you clean factor variables.

Author: summary of different operations?

Reviewer 2: i like leaving it in the chunk as comments -- not sure people will read or use more details

Author: cool

# This orders the levels -- since in all figures / tables, 0-4 should come
# before 4-24, etc
linelist_cleaned <- linelist_cleaned %>% 
  mutate(time_to_death = factor(time_to_death, 
                                levels = c("0-4 hours", 
                                           ">4-24 hours", 
                                           ">24-48 hours", 
                                           ">48 hours")))

# Change the order of levels of multiple categorical variables at the same time
linelist_cleaned <- linelist_cleaned %>%
  mutate_at(vars(starts_with("test")),          # Looks for variables beginning with "test"
            fct_relevel,
            "Positive", "Negative", "Not done"  # Sets order of levels
           )
```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
vector_vars

This chunk creates groups of variables that you might want to use together. That
way, if you want to run the same function over these variables, you can run it
all at once. For example, you may want to look at frequency of all symptoms at
the same time.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
```{r vector_vars}

> 

Reviewer: I'm thinking that these variables are things that can go in the setup chunk at the top since we are simply defining them.

Author: mmmm feel like when you are going through your first analysis and setting up you would be browsing etc first, before you know which vars you want to pull together....

Reviewer 2: agree with alex -- you possibly don't have the variables correctly named or coded, etc.

# return last day of reporting week 

> obs_end   <- week2date(sprintf("%s-7", reporting_week))

Reviewer: A couple of things I'm thinking about:

1. sprintf is a weirdly-named function and we should probably switch to `glue::glue()`
2. We can pre-define the observation end ([as above](https://github.com/R4EPI/sitrep/pull/172/files#r319977197)) to avoid this sprintf business
3. This chunk is `eval = FALSE`, which means that we should comment these lines out.

But, if we pre-define `obs_end` above, then we can rewrite this chunk to look like this:
```r
linelist_cleaned <- linelist_cleaned %>% 
  filter(date_of_consultation_admission <= as.Date(obs_end))

# define the first week of outbreak (date of first case)
first_week <- min(linelist_cleaned$epiweek)

# outbreak start 
# return the first day in the week of first case 
obs_start <- as.Date(first_week)

```

Reviewer 2: Used str_glue() since we already have that package loaded.

```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
save_cleaned_data

You can save your cleaned dataset as an Excel. 
This automatically names your file "linelist_cleaned_DATE", where DATE is the
current date.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
```{r save_cleaned_data, eval = FALSE}
# rio::export(linelist_cleaned, paste0("linelist_cleaned_", Sys.Date(), ".xlsx"))
```

> 

Author: maybe chuck in a signpost here that moving on to analysis part?

The most affected age group was `r tab_linelist(linelist_cleaned, age_group) %>% slice(which.max(n)) %>% pull(value)` years. 

#### Demographics 

Cases by age group and definition 
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
describe_by_age_group_and_def

This chunk will create a table of cases by age group and case definition.
You can only use this chunk if you have lab results and have defined a case

> definition variable.

Author: otherwise set this chunk to eval = FALSE

Reviewer 2: as above re eval

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
age_pyramid_under_two

This chunk creates a separate age/sex pyramid for children under 2
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
```{r age_pyramid_under_two, warning=FALSE}

filter(linelist_cleaned, age_years <= 2) %>%
  plot_age_pyramid(age_group = "age_group_mon",

>                    split_by = "sex") +

Author: maybe create a thirt option with the stack_by - rather than having it commented out?

Author: or just remove

Reviewer 2: removing

  kable(digits = 2)
```

Cases by lab results 
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
describe_by_labs

This chunk gives the counts and proportions for all of the variables in LABS.

> If you do not have lab results, comment out this chunk.

Author: eval = FALSE

Reviewer 2: as above re eval

were dead on arrival. 

Among inpatients who died, the time to death is shown below. 
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
describe_time_to_death

If you have the time_to_death available, you can use this chunk to describe when

> inpatients died. If not, comment it out.

Author: eval = f

CFR by age group among inpatients with known outcomes
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
cfr_by_age_group

This chunk gives the case fatality ratio among inpatients with outcomes, divided

> by age group. If you have no deaths reported, the table will not work well.

Reviewer: Better to be "If you have no deaths reported, this table will not be useful." since the table will work without death:

``` r
library(tidyverse)
library(sitrep)
iris %>%
  mutate(tepals = FALSE) %>%
  case_fatality_rate_df(deaths = tepals, group = Species, mergeCI = TRUE)
#> # A tibble: 3 x 5
#>   Species    deaths population   cfr ci          
#>   <fct>       <int>      <int> <dbl> <chr>       
#> 1 setosa          0         50     0 (0.00--7.13)
#> 2 versicolor      0         50     0 (0.00--7.13)
#> 3 virginica       0         50     0 (0.00--7.13)
```

<sup>Created on 2019-09-02 by the [reprex package](https://reprex.tidyverse.org) (v0.3.0)</sup>

```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
cfr_by_case_def

This chunk gives the case fatality ratio among inpatients with outcomes, divided
by case definition. You must have lab results or a case definition defined to

> use this. If you have no deaths, the table will not work well.

Author: uncomment and set to eval = FALSE

  kable(digits = 2)
```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
mortality_rate_CMR

To produce a crude mortality rate attributable to AJS per 10,000 people per 
day, use the folowing code chunk. 

This assumes that you are capturing every AJS death in your population and 
that your population remains stable over the time period of interest. 

In this situation the time period of interest is from the beginning of the 

> epiweek your first case occured in, until the last day of the epiweek you are 

Author: remove hyperlink on purpose?

Reviewer 2: hyperlink is in markdown, and this comment is not rendered in markdown

#### Maps 
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
read_shapefiles

To create maps, you need to have a shapefile of the area. Often, the MSF GIS
unit can provide shapefiles.

Your shapefile can be a polygon or points. Polygons do not need to be contiguous.

> 

Reviewer: removing this causes the mapping section to fail

Author: maybe move it up to the section where fake data is generated?

Reviewer 2: yep, having it in the fake data chunk doesn't work, as linelist_cleaned is not yet loaded. moved back to the map section.

# map <- st_set_crs(map, value = 4326) # Sets to WGS84

```

<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
choropleth_maps

Once you have loaded your shapefile, you can map the case counts or attack rates.

You will want to make your counts or AR categorical. R will not do this
automatically (unlike QGIS or ArcGIS).

This chunk will walk you through several steps:
- Determine if you have a polygon or point shapefile.
- Create table with categories of counts or ARs by region.
- Join your table with your shapefile.
- Choose which variable (for polygons) or color (for points) you will use.

Make sure you delete or comment out the section you are not using.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
```{r choropleth_maps, message = FALSE, warning = FALSE}

## Create a categories of ARs by region ----------------------------------------

# define maximum
max_ar    <- max(ar_region$`Upper 95%CI`, na.rm = TRUE) # define your highest AR

# create groups - one group will be 0 only, then up to 4 more groups evenly
# divided to maximum
breakers <- as.integer(c(0, # include zero as a standalone group

>              seq(1, max_ar, by = max_ar/4) # 1 to maximum with four divisions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
             find_breaks(n = max_ar, breaks = 4, snap = 10) # 1 to 4 divisions, snapping the boundaries to the nearest 10
```

             ))

## create a categorical variable using the age_categories function 
## (we aren't using ages - but it functions the same way!)
ar_map <- mutate(ar_region, 
             categories = age_categories(`AR (per 10,000)`, 
                                         breakers = breakers))

## Join table to shapefile -----------------------------------------------------

> mapsub <- left_join(map, ar, by = c("name" = "Region"))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mapsub <- left_join(map, ar_map, by = c("name" = "Region"))
```

## Plot for polygons -----------------------------------------------------------

## you could also fill by cases using `Cases (n)` in the fill option instead of `AR (per 10,000)`
ggplot() +

>   # shapefile as polygon

Author: spacing is weird

  geom_sf(data = mapsub, aes(fill = categories), col = "grey50") + 
  
  # needed to avoid gridlines being drawn
  coord_sf(datum = NA) + 
  
  # add a scalebar
  annotation_scale() + 
  
  # color the scale to be perceptually uniform 
  # drop FALSE keeps all levels 
  # name allows you to change the legend title 
  scale_fill_brewer(drop = FALSE, palette = "OrRd", name = "AR (per 10,000)") + 
  
  # label polygons
  geom_sf_text(data = mapsub, aes(label = name), colour = "grey50") + 
  
  # remove coordinates and axes
  theme_void() 

> ## Plot for points -------------------------------------------------------------

Author: maybe make a seperate chunk - with an explanatory html comment and set eval = FALSE rather than commented out

Reviewer 2: dropped from this section

# ggplot() +

> #   # plot shapefile as point

Reviewer: I'm wondering if this is necessary (it's one of those old code chunks that was commented out and never really tested. It has the unfortunate property of not actually plotting points, but basically just drawing a very thick border around the regions:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3639446/64124467-fe827480-cd9e-11e9-9826-ada5ce624efc.png)

Author: That's cus there aren't long and lat collected in the dictionary (which is designed for hospital settings) 
But I think we should still keep it in (in a seperate chunk) - because some community settings will still be collecting GPS data.

Reviewer: As long as we know that the construct works.

Author: Relatively convinced it was brought forward directly from the older generic template which had coords. 
Easily tested by taking a sample of coords from within the polygon ... Using sf::st_sample

Reviewer: that's a thing I did not know!

Author: Edit: I take it back that won't work for plotting points of cases as the cases longlat would come from the linelist not the shapefile

Reviewer 2: yeah, i don't think you can have an underlying point shapefile. you need at least some sort of polygon case map. but then R would have to process the lat/lon into the regions, which i'm not sure how to do. i would say delete the point sections.

Reviewer 2: but that doesn't make sense to me -- we can't do chloropleths with points. and then they'll just be floating in the ether without a basemap.

Author: you plot a blank polygon with geom_sf and on top you plot geom_point using lat long from the linelist (on training webstie will eventually show how to have openstreetmap basemaps)

Reviewer 2: > * think we need to be consistent with spacing between lines of related code. E.g. in some place we have blank lines between layers of a pipe or ggplot, in others not. Indifferent which one use, lets just stick to one though

tried to be as consistent as possible, but for one of the pipe sections (first use of tab_univariate), it's difficult to read as one big "chunk". so left with extra spacing for extra readability.
